# One-way function

One-way functions are easy to compute but it is very difficult to compute their inverse functions. Thus, having data `x` it is easy to calculate `f(x)` but, on the other hand, knowing the value of `f(x)` it is quite difficult to calculate the value of `x`.

There is not a mathematical prove that one-way functions exist. In practical applications functions that behave similarly as real one-way functions are used.

## Trapdoor one-way function

Trapdoor one-way functions are types of one-way functions that contain a kind of "back door" (trapdoor). As in the case of ordinary one-way functions it is easy to compute their values for given data but it is very difficult to compute their inverse functions. However, if one has some additional secret information, he can easily compute the inverse function as well.

An example of such trapdoor one-way functions may be finding the prime factors of large numbers. Nowadays, this task is practically infeasible. On the other hand, knowing one of the factors, it is easy to compute the other ones.

## One-way hash function

One-way hash functions transform input messages of various length into output sequences of fixed length (usually shorter). The output sequence is often called a hash value. Hash values are often used to mark input sequences, that is to assign to them some unique values that characterize them.

One-way hash functions fulfil all conditions of one-way functions. It is easy to compute their values based on input data but having only a hash value one can't determine the original input sequence.

A one-way hash function should be collision-free. This means that it should be very difficult to find two different sequences that produce the same hash value.

Algorithms of one-way hash functions are often known to the public. They provide security thanks to their properties as one-way functions. Usually, a change of one bit of input data, causes changing about half of the output bits. Data generated by hash functions should be pseudorandom (it cannot be possible to distinguish output data from ordinary random data).

